# Literary Review of the RCT papers

## 1. *Mobile phone-delivered reminders and incentives to improve childhood immunization coverage and timeliness in Kenya (M-SIMU): a cluster randomized controlled trial*
This paper studies the correlation between short message service reminders, combined with monetary incentives if strict compliance is met, and immunization uptake in Kenya. The study was done in rural, western Kenya, where there is extremely high prevalence of HIV, tuberculosis, and malaria. Villages, instead of households or individuals, were randomly assigned to either the control group or treatment groups, and the immunization coverage rate of different villages were studied after the treatments. In this study, there were 152 villages in rural western Kenya being studied, in which 38 were assigned to the control group, while the rest were assigned to treatment groups with different monetary incentives (0 KES, 75 KES, and 200 KES). 

The research finds out that in a rural Sub-Saharan setting with high baseline immunization rate, which is above 80%, SMS reminder combined with small monetary incentives has modest impact on increasing the vaccination coverage rates. However, looking at different subgroups within the treatment group, SMS reminder with monetary incentives could significantly increase the vaccination coverage rates of people with lower income or lower-median income, as they are more susceptible to material incentives. Nevertheless, economic incentives might not be scalable in other settings, as other organizations and agencies might have more rigor financial constraints that make such material incentives impossible, which tends to be common in many least developed countries that need such SMS reminders. 

One of the assumptions of the studies, as the authors admit, is that the outmigration does not affect the randomization and the balanced test. In the studies, when caregivers migrated out the village, they would be excluded from our studies and we generally assume that they share the same socioeconomic characteristics with the in-group samples. However, as the authors admit in the paper, there were some differences in sociodemographic characteristics between the analytic sample and those who were excluded from the analysis. It might create some degree of omitted variable bias in the studies. Moreover, the other assumption is that we generally assume that caregivers would read the SMS reminder if it is sent out, while it might not be the case if different caregivers share the same mobile phone, which is pretty common in this studies (51% of the sample share mobile phones with others). 

## 2. *Effect of Mobile Phone Text Message Reminders on Routine Immunization Uptake in Pakistan: Randomized Controlled Trial*
Unlike the first paper, which was conducted in a rural setting, this research was conducted in an urban setting in the city of Karachi, Pakistan. Without any forms of economic or monetary incentives, households were randomized to intervention group or the control group, while households in the intervention group would receive SMS reminders. The studies concluded that automated simple SMS reminder would be feasible for improving routine immunization coverage. In this study, 300 households were randomized to a control group (150 households) and a treatment group (150 households), and data on routine immunization coverage was collected at 6-weeks after birth, 10-weeks after birth, and 14-weeks after birth. The research finds out that the SMS reminders improved vaccination uptake according to the RI schedule at 6, 10, and 14 weeks.

The most significant limitation of this research paper is its small sample size, which might not be representative of the general population of the city of Karachi. Also, the research only covered and evaluated the coverage of all DPT or pentavalent doses, rather than all vaccinations. Similar to the first paper, this research also assumed that caregivers, or parents, would read the SMS reminder when it is sent out, while it might not reflect the reality when different households share the same mobile phone, which is common in lower income communities in less developed countries. 

## 3. *PHASE II OF THE VACCINATION APPOINTEMENTS REMINDERS BY MOBILE TELEPHONY IN THE HEALTH DISTRICT OF KORHOGO*
This research paper studies the effects of SMS reminders to mother-child couples on improving the vaccination coverage in the health district of Korhogo, Ivory Coast. The research covers mother-child couples in both rural and urban areas in Korhogo, in which there are 1,596 mother-child couples being examined. Among the 1,596 mother-child pairs, 798 were randomized to the control group that do not receive SMS reminders, and 798 were randomized to the treatment group that do receive SMS reminders on vaccination. The finding indicates that there is a strong positive correlation between being a member of the treatment group and going to the appointment and/or being vaccinated/ receiving supplements for all types of appointments in comparison to the control group.

The major assumption of this study is that the randomization is a double-blind controlled study, in order to avoid placebo effects and observer expectancy effect. However, it was not fully implemented. The research was a government-sponsored public health initiative, and most of the field officers were public health officials who have the responsibility and obligation to encourage all mothers to get their newborn children vaccinated on time, which blurs the boundaries between the control group and treatment group. In a strictly implemented double-blind controlled test, the mothers should not be told their group assignment, neither should they know the group assignments of others. However, as the paper mentioned in its caveats, in the rural health centers with small communities, the public health agents could know well enough of their clients, so they might not share information with mothers on control/treatment group assignments, thereby “contaminating” the randomized control trial. 

## 4. *SMS text message reminders to improve infant vaccination coverage in Guatemala: A pilot randomized controlled trial*
The paper studies the effects of SMS reminders on infant vaccination coverage and timeliness in Guatemala City, and the studies were conducted at two public health clinics in Guatemala City serving publicly insured and low-income population. Participants of this study were parents of infants between ages of 8 and 14 weeks who are literate and capable of using modern technology (receiving SMS). Also, only parents with mobile phones can participate. After the screening of participants, 321 participants were randomized to a control group (161 participants) and a treatment group (160 participants). For those in the treatment group, they would receive an automated text message before each vaccination date. The paper finds out that there is a statistically significant distinction on vaccination completion rate between the control group and the treatment group, thereby concluding that SMS reminders have enormous potential to improve health outcomes in Low- and Middle-Income Countries by reaching large populations at low cost.

One of the major assumptions in this study is that researchers assume participants in the treatment group receive the SMS reminder when it is sent out. Moreover, due to the lack of a national level immunization registration system, the researchers were unable to track childhood vaccination records outside of the study clinics. It might lead to some degree of selection bias and/or survivor bias. 

## 5. *Effectiveness of short message services reminder on childhood immunization programme in Kadoma, Zimbabwe - a randomized controlled trial, 2013*
A study was conducted in Kadoma, Zimbabwe on how SMS reminders help to increase the attendance for immunization appointments for newborn children. 304 young mothers in Kadoma were recruited, in which 152 were randomized to the control group and 152 were randomized to the treatment group. In control group, only routine health education was provided, while in treatment group, mothers would receive SMS reminders on immunization at 6, 10, and 14 weeks after childbirth, in addition to the routine health education. It was found that the immunization coverage rate of the treatment group was significantly higher than that in the control group. 

Like other research studies, one of the major assumptions here is that researchers assumed that mothers would read the SMS reminder when they receive that. Also, in the paper, it illustrates that only mothers who have a cell phone and who are residents of Kadoma city are eligible for participation, which indicates that the implementation of SMS reminder might not be scalable. For instance, it is likely to be the case that mothers who are economically advantaged tend to have better awareness of sanitation, and they also use mobile phones in their daily lives. Also, Kadoma city might have better infrastructure system, especially public transportation system, that makes it easier for caregivers to come to public health centers and get their children vaccinated. In other words, such claim might not hold if the settings are different, such as in a rural area where there are both high illiteracy and low coverage of mobile network. 

## 6. *Mobile Phone Incentives for Childhood Immunizations in Rural India*
A study was conducted in a rural community in Mewat region, Haryana, India, on how automated SMS reminder on immunization, with or without compliance-linked incentives, impact on the immunization coverage and timeliness. 608 children were participating in this research, in which 204 were randomized to the control group, 201 were randomized to the treatment group with SMS reminder, and 203 were randomized to the treatment group with SMS reminder plus compliance-linked incentives, which was approximately 50 cents in this research. In this research paper, it was found that the percentage of children receiving timely immunizations of the SMS reminder treatment group is lower than that of the control group; however, the percentage of timely immunizations of the SMS reminder plus compliance-linked incentives group is statistically-significantly higher than that of the control group. 

The major assumption here is that the randomized control trial was conducted in a double-blind controlled test, in which there is no placebo effect, Hawthorne effect, or other spillover effects that might hurt the objectivity of the RCT. The paper illustrates that “given that the subjects from the intervention and control groups were residing in the same geographical region, it is possible that the Hawthorne effect could have contributed to a lower observed effect of the intervention”. Also, there might be other spillover effects that “actually treat” on the observations in the control group. For example, if a “controlled” mother and a “treated” mother are neighbors, the “treated” mother might remind the “controlled” mother of timely vaccination. In a small rural community, the social networks among households might intensify such spillover effects. 

## 7. *Reducing routine vaccination dropout rates: evaluating two interventions in three Kenyan districts, 2014*
The study was conducted in three public health facilities in three selected areas in Kenya, Machakos, Langata, and Njoro. The study enrolled 1,116 children, in which 372 were randomized to the control group, 372 were randomized to the first treatment group in which stickers would be provided to remind parents to bring children for second and third dose, and 372 were randomized to the second treatment group in which parents would receive SMS reminders. The research paper discovered that immunization coverage was higher in the SMS reminder group than in the control group, and the results were statistically significant; moreover, there is also difference between sticker group and control group, but the results are not statistically significant. 

As the paper listed, one of the assumptions that authors make is that children would go to the same health center for different doses of immunization. If a child received her first does in one public health center but received her second and/or third doses in another health center, it would be considered unvaccinated in our studies. Nevertheless, in the first paper on another similar test conducted in Kenya, it is noted that in some regions in Kenya, mothers would usually give birth in their parents houses and go back to their partners’ residences after delivery. Therefore, it might increase the dropout rates. 

## 8. *Enhancing Routine Immunization Performance using Innovative Technology in an Urban Area of Nigeria*
The study was conducted in 8 public health facilities in Egor local government area of Edo State, Nigeria. 1,001 children were enrolled in this randomized control trial, in which 500 were randomized to the treatment group and 501 were randomized to the control group. For those in the treatment group, their parents would receive a SMS reminder prior to the vaccination date. This research paper finds out that routine immunization performance was significantly better in the treatment group than the control group. Also, in a cost-benefits analysis, the projected costs of SMS reminder are lower than that of home-visits. 

Likewise, one of the major assumptions is that caregivers would receive and read the SMS reminders when they were sent. Caregivers were expected to be able to read the SMS messages, which might not apply to the caregivers who are illiterate. Also, the dropout rate would increase if caregivers change their phone numbers without notifying the study group or they vaccinate their children in the public health centers that are outside the sites of recruitments. 

## Potential Limitations and Concerns of Charity Science Health trials in India
**First, the randomized controlled trial needs to be truly “randomized”, in which potential biases, such as selection bias and survivorship bias, should be eliminated to the minimum.** For instance, if we collect data only from the systems of the hospitals, we are only dealing with newborns on institutional delivery, while ignoring newborns babies that are delivered at home. Generally, newborns on institutional delivery might come from families of higher socioeconomic status, resulting in significant selection bias in our studies. However, if we incorporate the data newborns of non-institutional delivery through home visits, it might increase the costs of our research. 

**Secondly, the boundaries between control group and treatment group should be drawn clearly, in order to reduce the spillover effects.** In a small rural community, the control group and treat group might know each other personally, resulting in great spillover effects as mothers in the control group have strong incentives to get their children vaccinated on time, so they tend to seek help from their friends and/or relatives in the treatment group. It would be ideal if control groups and treat groups are in two geographically remote areas, but they share similar socioeconomic backgrounds and they have similar extent of public health access. 

**Last but not least, it would be ideal if we could employ an SMS delivery log to register delivery reports, so that we would be able to track if an SMS is successfully sent, as well as if it is read by the target recipients.**

